Do you have a passport? No, I'm I'm I'm
20 years old.
Social Security number? Yes.
He was kind of awkward.
He was very goofy.
He does not read like [music] a Chinese
spy.
I at least had in my head this idea of a
spy, of James Bond, somebody jumping out
of airplanes.
And that is
not G.
>> [music]
>> How long have you been in the US?
Uh today today today uh almost 6 months.
This story is about aviation secrets.
[music] In particular, jet engine trade
secrets.
These are technologies that China wants
very badly. It's in the paper every day
what China is alleged to be stealing en
masse from the United [music] States.
>> The playbook is simple. Rob, replicate,
and replace. We cannot tolerate a nation
that steals the fruits of our
brainpower. G was almost like a packrat
when it came to electronic information.
[music]
You have text messages. You have videos.
You have photos. You have so much
digital evidence about what he was
doing.
>> What type of real spy is going to take a
photo of a top-secret blood oath?
No one. Mr. Bean would do that.
He was almost like a kid.
I think it was clear G was a stand-in
[music] for some of the bigger conflicts
that were going on between China and the
United States.
His goal was to get US citizenship, to
become an intelligence [music] officer.
G was on that path.
So, is there anything else you would
like to report to you or discuss with US
Army Intelligence?
>> [music]
>> Uh I think I
I
I report everything.
When I met Ji Chaoqun, I just thought he
was this cute, quirky guy.
He felt like an extrovert to me because
he just
I don't know, was so goofy and
would talk to anyone.
He really did have a pureness to him. He
just, you know, seemed like he just
wanted to do good.
To have such a happy-go-lucky
personality takes so much energy.
It feels like it would be authentic.
But,
who's to say?
>> [music]
>> I've covered China
>> for a long time, and Ji Chaoqun, in many
ways, is kind of the prototypical
college kid for most of the story.
He goes to a very prestigious
university, the Beijing University of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, and he
studied aviation engineering. This is a
very important topic for the Chinese
government. Jet engines are one of the
hardest to replicate technologies.
These were developed primarily during
World War II, and for many decades the
US and Europe have held a monopoly.
China has expended a lot of effort and
energy on stealing those technologies,
or trying to.
G is at a job fair about 6 months before
he is set to graduate with his
engineering degree,
and he sees this kind of mysteriously
labeled booth where there's a person
who's purporting to be a professor
recruiting for what he only describes as
a confidential unit. It doesn't take
long for G to realize that he's being
recruited for the Ministry of State
Security, China's premier intelligence
agency.
>> [music]
[music]
>> MSS stands for the Ministry of State
Security, and it's basically China's
main intelligence [music] agency.
Think of a combination between the CIA
and the FBI.
The MSS doesn't really see a distinction
between spying for the government and
spying for Chinese companies and getting
the kind of secrets they would be
interested in in their attempt to catch
[music] up and surpass their
competitors. The vast majority of the
actual MSS officers [music] stay in
China and never leave China, and so
there's zero risk to them. G is unusual
in that he is someone who was recruited
in China [music] and sent overseas
really as an MSS agent.
There are two reasons the MSS was
interested in G. One, he had technical
knowledge that could help them identify
trade secrets to steal. And the other
was that he had a visa to travel to the
US, and he was clean. So, in that sense,
he's the perfect person to recruit to go
spy in the US.
They are really laying it on thick that
this would be a really cool, kind of
sexy, interesting opportunity.
>> [music]
>> They're taking him out to dinners. They
really wine and dine him. It was also
something that appealed to his sense of
helping his country. He was into like
the military. He was into [music]
this idea of being a spy, like a James
Bond type spy in some very basic way.
And I think that was a lot of the
allure. He travels to Nanjing, where the
aviation trade secret theft is really
[music] kind of headquartered.
That's where he gets his initial
training.
Once G signs with MSS, he's really
excited about it. This might be the
coolest thing that ever happened to him,
to be recruited to be a spy.
>> [music]
>> He sends his friend photos of his MSS
registration form.
And his friend even tells him like,
"Hey, are you supposed to be sending
this to me?"
He is sending pictures of all of these
hundred-dollar bills, US dollars, and
he's laid them out over what looks like
possibly his living room. The sense is
this kid is so excited to tell somebody
that he's a spy, and he's not supposed
to, but he can't help himself.
>> [music]
>> Mid-2013, G gets his visa, he travels to
the US, and he begins studying at the
Illinois Institute of Technology.
>> [music]
>> G's daily life in Chicago to start is
pretty routine. He goes to school, he
works out, he plays games online at
night. He hasn't done anything yet.
His girlfriend comes to visit him in
Chicago, his parents come to visit him,
and he travels. They traveled a lot,
they went out west, and on one trip they
passed through Salt Lake City,
and he has an encounter that really
would wind up changing his life.
He gets introduced to the Mormon Church.
>> [music]
>> I don't feel like he took much time to
make that decision to join the LDS
Church. He was so excited about it. We
were [music] 19, 20-year-olds, and we
thought we were really cool. We would
say things like, "Oh yeah, that's so
Gucci." And stuff. And he would make fun
of us for that. And [music] so, he'd be
like, we'd ask him how he is, and he'd
be like, "I'm Gucci."
This is a picture of Chaoqun on [music]
his baptism day, and this is the program
for Chaoqun's baptism.
Has his favorite scripture on [music]
there,
which is a scripture from the Book of
Mormon.
The scripture says, "Wherefore, you must
press forward with a steadfastness
[music] in Christ, having a perfect
brightness of hope and of love of God
and of all men. Behold, thus saith the
Father, [music] you shall have eternal
life."
Yeah, I gave the opening prayer for
[music] it, and then he was baptized.
He
would do as much as possible with the
church with us, [music] especially.
Like, we did get really close with him.
He just seemed like the type of person
that just knew exactly what he wanted to
do always.
G was really enjoying his life in
America. He had made friends.
But, he does have a secret.
>> [music]
>> I knew this case was going to be one of
the highlights of my career.
Economic espionage is a significant
national security threat to the United
States, to us. Hopefully, people around
the country and people around the world
understand [music] that, hey, we should
be taking this seriously.
I learned a ton about the MSS because of
this case,
what the MSS does and how it's
structured and its history over time.
A lot of people who are being recruited
have what's called like in this world
handlers, uh people who are experts who
handle the individuals being recruited
to make sure they're following the right
processes and everything is going
smoothly. He was being handled by Xu
Yanjun, and Xu Yanjun's responsibility,
we knew, was to steal aviation-related
secrets. Xu was the one who's giving G
directions about what he should be
[music] doing to help the MSS. In August
2015 is when we first see a very
specific tasking from the MSS, and
specifically Xu Yanjun.
Xu reaches out to G and asks him to
gather information about certain
scientists in the US. What Xu asked him
to do was to log on to three different
background check websites and download
background checks on nine scientists.
[music] These are commercial websites.
You enter a credit card number, you type
in a name. This is all kind of public
[music]
commercially available data. And these
were mostly Chinese nationals
>> [music]
>> living and working in the US for major
defense contractors.
>> And what he was really trying to do
was gather intelligence about
scientists, especially scientists who
worked on aviation related technologies.
>> [music]
>> Uh to try to identify those scientists
and help recruit them to steal American
technologies and give them to the
Chinese government.
This is a pretty simple task that G is
given. But it takes G longer than it
should have.
Xu Yanjun is kind of pestering him like,
"Hey, do you have that stuff? Is it
ready? Can you send it to me?"
G eventually gets the background checks
together and he sends them in an email
to Xu with the subject line "Midterm
Exams".
Now, G's facing a problem. He's here on
a student visa and that means once he's
done with his schools, [music] he's got
to leave the country and you know, go
back to China. G comes up with a plan.
He joins the military through this MAVNI
program.
It allows the military to recruit people
who are not citizens but have special
resources or talents that the military
really needs. He's a fluent Chinese
speaker. The benefit for him is [music]
that it really really speeds up uh the
citizenship process. If you join the
MAVNI program, it could happen in 6
months or a year.
Things are looking amazing for G. He's
figured out a way to stay in the United
States. He's joined the military. He's
on the fast track to become a citizen,
get access to sensitive information.
Things are going phenomenal but then
they come to sort of a screeching halt.
>> [music]
>> In April of 2018, a guy in a red car
outside G's apartment gets out and
accosts him on the street.
The man tells G
that his friend from Nanjing Xu Yanjun
is in trouble.
G travels with with the man to a hotel
room in downtown Chicago. The man shows
G a news article stating that Chinese
spy arrested in Belgium at the request
of the United States.
G's main handler, Xu Yanjun, he was
increasingly disgruntled at work and he
starts taking bigger and bigger risks to
gather trade secrets from abroad. He
winds up traveling to Europe and he gets
caught.
>> [music]
>> The person G's talking to is saying that
he's an MSS officer as well and they
need to figure out how Xu Yanjun got
caught and how deep the penetration of
this spy network has gone.
These are not totally friendly
interviews. G is kind of on the back
foot.
And thus begins this relationship
between G and this guy who he thinks is
his handler
but actually is an undercover FBI agent.
>> [music]
>> The FBI agent is wearing a wire so all
of it's recorded.
There's three meetings. One in April of
2018, one in May and then one in
September.
G is incredibly forthcoming. In a weird
way, he's kind of eager to like show
that he was good at his job thinking
that this guy is his new boss. He's got
these, you know, big ambitions for what
he's going to go on to do once he gets
into the army and once he gets his
clearance.
The FBI undercover asks him to sign a
receipt on which is written in Mandarin
like receipt for MSS spy payment.
The signal to affect the arrest would be
that G signs another of these payment
receipts and that would be the moment
where the FBI would would would knock on
the door and arrest him.
The problem was the FBI had planned for
everything except in the room there was
no pen.
So, the undercover had to go into the
hallway.
Now, he's given a pen by another member
of the the arrest team.
No pen in my pocket.
He signs for the money that he's given
for his work. The FBI go in and then
arrest the undercover. I mean, PRETEND
ARREST HIM.
BUT YOU CAN HEAR THE UNDERCOVER ACTUALLY
KIND OF LIKE scream in mock like terror,
I guess, as he's as he's arrested.
Then they bundle them out of the room
and then these two FBI agents sit down
at the table with G and start to have a
conversation with him.
We're we're going to figure out what's
going on here.
The ruse is basically like, "Okay, this
guy that we just arrested, he's been
like working with the MSS. Why are you
talking to him?"
We think he's
in contact with Are you familiar with
the Ministry of State Security in China?
So, he is
uh really
connected or intertwined with uh
basically spies
over there.
And he's like acts on their behalf
in the United States.
So, that's why we're
that's why we're here.
There's some effort being made to see if
G will cooperate and maybe
become an asset for them.
He doesn't decide to do that
and then they
arrest him. 27-year-old Ji Chaoqun, he
is being held right now in the Metro
Correctional Center in the Loop.
Convicted, he faces up to 10 years in
federal prison. [music] They started
getting Facebook message requests from
different news reporters asking how I
knew him. They saw pictures of me with
Chaoqun and they were writing stories.
I did feel like it had to be a mistake.
[music] There's no way that Chaoqun
would have been a spy. You know, that he
>> [music]
>> would be trying to give secrets that
would
undermine a place that
he loved. He loved the United States. He
loved Chicago.
Yeah, this time Xu had been extradited
from Europe and was in jail in Ohio. G
was in jail in Chicago and they're both
headed for trial.
As it often does, China denied all the
allegations. China will often accuse the
US of, you know, kind of manufacturing
these details and making things up.
In private, however, China was lobbying
behind the scenes to get these two guys
back.
I've been involved in some of the bigger
cases in Chicago.
I've tried a lot of racketeering cases,
[music] complex fraud trials, murders. I
represented Harvey Weinstein in his
trial.
And I've done [music] everything in
between. But this was my first uh you
know, representing an alleged spy. I
don't want to say outside of my comfort
zone because criminal law is criminal
law but it was definitely uh a challenge
I wanted [music] to take on.
The first time I met G was at the MCC
Chicago. It's the it's both a jail and
prison here a few blocks away from the
federal courthouse and it uh
it's a giant triangle-shaped building
with little slits of windows and it's
sort of ominous and foreboding and
>> [music]
>> there was no doubt he was nervous and
scared, I think, in that moment.
I saw him probably weekly, more or less,
if not more often some weeks over the
course of 4 years and
developed a very close relationship with
them. I went [music] to meet with G. I
think Ryan came with me and we just hit
it off. I liked him right away and I
think one [music] of the things that he
was concerned about was whether or not
>> [music]
>> I would be comfortable representing
somebody who was charged with
essentially spying on the United States.
And I certainly had [music] no problems
with the allegations in the case and
told him that that is not a problem.
G was charged with several crimes. They
included conspiring to act as a foreign
agent to the US,
>> [music]
>> acting as a foreign agent in the US,
committing wire fraud
and then lying to the US [music]
government.
He always maintained his innocence. It
was clear that he wanted to proceed to
trial and we were going to proceed to
trial.
There was a great deal of evidence
that made us say this is going to be
hard.
We had his little registration form
registering as the MSS,
>> [music]
>> him signing a receipt that says MSS
which showed that he knew he was part of
the MSS.
We tried to show that he was
manipulated, that he was young, [music]
that he was naive, that he really didn't
do anything here that would be
tantamount to spying. We weren't dealing
with issues of national security. We
weren't dealing with classified
information. We just weren't. We were
dealing with background reports you
could get off Spokeo. Most of the
scientists who were part of the list
that she was collecting information
about, we had most of them testify at
the trial
and we saw them really as victims
[music] of this conduct. They had their
personal information collected by a
foreign spy agency and they were going
to be targeted.
>> Was Ji contacted by members of the MSS?
I think the government proved that.
[music]
Was he planning on being a long-term
overseas asset? I don't think so, not
for a second. Who paid for Ji's defense?
His family.
Is there any reason to think that the
Chinese government Not for me.
Typically we say a jury will deliberate
for about a day for every week of trial.
So we were expecting something like two
days of deliberation.
But they came back quickly.
When I heard the first charge, guilty,
that I felt pressure and anxiety
released because that was our main
charge and he'd been found guilty.
Guilty on all counts except for the wire
fraud counts. He was found not guilty of
those charges.
>> [music]
>> Uh and then it was off to sentencing.
And I think that the government, if you
look at their sentencing memorandum,
80% of it is about what China is alleged
to be [music] stealing en masse from the
United States.
That was what they wanted the judge to
focus on, but at the end of the day I
disagreed with that. What was fair, what
wasn't, you know, that's that's not I
have my opinions on it for sure.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Typically when someone is caught as a
spy in another country, they're
expelled. I mean there's this idea that
everyone does it. We want our spies to
not be thrown in prison in other
countries.
But targeting companies animates [music]
this idea that it goes outside the
bounds of traditional espionage.
The FBI wanted to set an example with
these guys and they did.
Xue Jianjun gets 20 years in prison, Ji
Chaoqun [music] gets eight years in
prison. Kind of the last thing we were
expecting to see, very late in the Biden
administration, that both of them would
be sent back to China.
Tonight Ji and his convicted Chinese spy
handler are part of a spy swap with
China resulting in the return of three
Americans long held by Beijing. A couple
of them also accused as spies. I
definitely through the years [music]
have wanted to reach out. Like who
doesn't want answers? How involved was
he? Was it something that he just
[music] got roped into like in in his
innocence, didn't really know what it
meant. Think about the the flip side of
you know, like if it was [music] an
American doing this, like looking for
Chinese secrets, like we would be okay
with it, right? Like that's the reality.
I saw him kind of as a kid that just
grew up on the other side of the world.
Like if he was born here,
he'd be my neighbor and just like
anybody [music] else. A great American
and probably a patriot.
There's what he was charged for and what
he was convicted for and then there's
kind of what could have been had Ji not
gotten caught. What would his path look
like five years, 10 years, 20 [music]
years down the line? Let's say he wound
up working for a major aerospace
company. Who knows what his career could
have looked like. Our focus [music] is
on illegal conduct of the Chinese
government and not of uh people in China
and certainly not of Chinese Americans.
People of every race, every ethnicity,
every gender, everything have been
prosecuted for these kinds of crimes.
We want to be very careful about having
preconceived notions about what a spy
looks like. [music]
Most people don't live in the world of
espionage. We think of it as an issue
that's kind of out there somewhere.
That's for the spy agencies.
When it comes to trade secret theft,
however,
it could be the person next to you and
you'd have no idea.
There's almost no way to know and that's
the really troubling, scary part.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Oh.